Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined by Kyle Helson as always, and I want to thank you for listening right now, and I want to ask that you please consider subscribing to the podcast, and if you've done that, then please consider recommending the podcast to a friend, or you can give us a rating or a review on iTunes or wherever you listen to your podcasts. So remember that we're also ad-free, and you can support the podcast at empiricalcycling.com slash donate, a few bucks for some burritos or for the web service or whatever you want.
You can earmark it for us. We promise we will spend it on whatever you tell us to. And we have no show notes for this episode because it's an interview episode. And if you have any coaching and consultation inquiries, questions and comments, you can send an email to empiricalcycling at gmail.com. So today we are going to be talking to, well, something that listeners may not know is that I've picked up the role of ECCC Conference Director. That's the Eastern Collegiate Cycling Conference.
is the ACCC director, and we are talking to one of our friends, Nick, who directs the Southeast Cycling Conference, and also Laura Ann Eaton, who is the board president for the ACCC. So this is a pretty wide-ranging conversation.
We reminisce about our collegiate days, but we also talk a lot about the stuff that's been going on with the pandemic and the cancellations that we've had to do and some of the feedback that we've gotten through that and basically just what's going on in cycling in general. So this is not a scripted episode. This is just us kind of having a chat. So I hope you all enjoy it. Thanks. What if I crack a beer in the background? Is that PG? I think that's very collegiate.
For people who aren't aware of the organization of collegiate cycling, generally collegiate cycling is a collegiate cycling is organized nationally by USA Cycling but then ran through regional conferences similar in a way to how the local associations are set up but
Sometimes local associations, for example, are only like one state like New York or Arizona or something like that. But in collegiate cycling, the conferences span multiple states most of the time. And Nick is a veteran of this as well. So maybe Nick, if you want to explain a little bit how the typical seasons are set up within collegiate cycling.
Our seasons follow much in line like how most people are racing. So your mountain bike and track are kind of overlapping. So when athletes are coming back into school, picture August, sometimes your first race weekend is the following weekend for us. And then track nationals is probably sometime there and around September.
Once we're done with mountain bike nationals, we're rolling right on into cyclocross in that late October, November timeframe with nationals in December under this new organization or new structure coming down from USA Cycling to have nationals before Christmas break and then all of spring is pretty much road season so it really kind of depends upon
where you're at. Down here we start, or this year we started in January and went up until March and that was our season. Yeah. So Laura Ann, as the person who's been a student most recently, can you tell us a little bit about how your typical collegiate mountain bike race goes throughout the season or typical collegiate cyclocross race? What goes into how the season is set up?
and what is a race like? So as a director and participant at the same time, which I would not necessarily recommend, basically it's honestly pretty chill. Getting the venue for mountain bike and cyclocross races is the biggest part and it's usually just calling somebody, telling them you're a poor college student.
you just want to use their property the trails that are already built it will be non-invasive you'll use their facilities hopefully generate some revenue for them and then you just advertise and it's pretty easy with a blanket race structure we as the conference leadership dictate registration entry fees so that's pretty easy for people to implement
And the racing is super chill. You're just out there with your friends trying to smash each other. You pretty much know who's going to win or where people are going to end up because you're racing the same people all season. So it's a fun test against yourself. And then everybody drinks beer and does homework, honestly. The people who are 21 drink beer. Of course. Only in my senior year. Only the people of age, yeah.
and so for your typical collegiate mountain bike and cyclocross seasons the planning for all those for people who haven't tried to plan or host a race that usually occurs in the spring of that of the school year before and then into the summer you try to get ready and then that's when all the conferences get really get rolling on getting those races promoted and so right now is kind of that
It's nominally that time when people are really securing venues and things like that. And so for people who've never put on a race before, typically for all these races promoted through USA Cycling, what you do is you tell USA Cycling that you want to host an event. It doesn't matter if you're a college team or you're a regular team. You say, hey, I want to host an event. I'm going to fill out all the necessary paperwork.
That is how you get officials assigned, because USA Cycling controls who the officials are that are going to come to your race. If it's a new race, they'll make sure that your courses are nominally approved and things like that. To me, putting on events is something, and collegiate cycling in general, really is one of the biggest benefits, I think, that we as
Team Presidents or even as students on a team get to enjoy because I still think about where I am now in my life and working on projects and project management and that is a direct relation to running a race event and you look at all of your volunteers as people that are looking to you for guidance.
So, I mean, if you've never put on a race event before, you don't know the stress that comes with having a volunteer show up, you know, 30 minutes late and then the field is about to roll out from the start line and you're like, oh, hey, by the way, I need you to be the wheel truck for this race that's already leaving. So, you know, for sure. Grab some friends to hop in the van on the way out. Oh, yeah.
I mean, you know, hosting an event or managing an event is the next level of stress that comes with being a part of collegiate cycling. When you're a club member and then you have everybody else in a conference looking to you for guidance and this is probably the biggest project you've ever undertaken in your life and you're managing a, you know, when you think about it, it's, you know, probably anywhere from
Five to fifteen thousand dollars in revenue, you know, depending upon how large your event is. I mean, you could be talking about a very serious project and, you know, there's there's nothing else that really parallels it, in my opinion. For sure. And I think I think that's something that also if you think about a lot of the group projects you may do in throughout school and things like that, like rarely do you.
impact such a large number of people like you do when you put on a race. And I think showing college students and relatively young people how to put on good bike races is one of the biggest benefits of collegiate cycling outside of the racing aspect. Well, it's also a very practical thing to learn how to do because I remember...
When I was in my late teens, early 20s, I didn't know how to organize anything, like my life, let alone a bike race. And after organizing races myself and helping people, helping student race directors, helping them manage their event, it's awesome to see that they get that, oh, I actually have skill and utility here.
that I can put to use anywhere now that I see what I need to look for in the big picture to make everything roll smoothly. I mean, it's absolutely a resume builder. I put it on my CV. X dollars, Y amount of people, etc. Yeah, I think that's a good point. Like, if you are a person looking to get a job and you want to talk about things that you have done, you know,
that make you different than someone else who just graduated from college with the same degree that you have from a similar school and all that stuff. Like, you know, race promotion is a big, unique experience that you can highlight for sure. And so it is really a whole production put on by conferences and conference leadership like the four of us, but we really
put a lot of the onus on the college students within the teams and the active racers that want to host these races to get them done. And so when you work with USA Cycling, they provide this sort of infrastructure with the permits and that within the permitting process, that means that you get event insurance.
and things like I mentioned, like officiating and if people are familiar with the upgrade process, like if you work with a USA Cycling permanent event, then USA Cycling says that those event results can be used for upgrades and things like that. But the whole kind of thing got turned upside down during this pandemic, right? When everyone's thinking like, oh, big events, are they safe? Are they a good idea?
Well even small events Even small events but we in the collegiate cycling world kind of ran into this in the spring with road season as Nick kind of alluded to earlier that some conferences some places got through part of road season and Nick if you want to talk a little bit about your road season you can what happened and how far did you guys get and yeah
What was your breaking point? Yeah, I mean, so we got to a point where we were, I mean, we were almost done. We were almost at our conference championship. So, you know, everybody, I mean, the points were established. People were really looking forward to finishing off the end of the year. And we had great events lined up.
this was the first year that all of our events were not parking lot crits which for those of you that don't know is a huge contingent of a collegiate cycling event if you have not participated in a parking lot crate once in your life you definitely will if you become a collegiate cyclist and we were very excited about finishing off the season strong and then as we saw things changing across the world
It didn't take long for us to react. You know, we, and I think event organizers across the U.S. very quickly realized that, you know, they, they, we weren't going to be having events for at least a short time. And, you know, it looks like we're starting things back up now, but it's, it's, it's tough for sure. And Laura Ann, within the, within the ACCC,
How many races did we get through? We got through Probably only like two weekends. Yeah, two or three weekends. One of them was a joint race with the SCCCC with you guys in the southeast. And Cole, you guys got through none, am I correct? Yeah, we were looking at our first race of the season and it was bearing down on us real fast and we were trying to
Get information about federal regulation, state regulation, are gatherings going to be okay, are sports going to be okay, can people travel? And then as the magnitude and the seriousness of it dawned on us, we were like, we can't race? What are we, nuts? We have to cancel right now. And that's what we ended up doing. And so as official conference director, I've been conference director for exactly zero races, and I've canceled three seasons now. Oh, man.
So, yeah, to kind of fill in some of the gaps here, the typical collegiate road season in most places is going to run something like at the earliest, February, if you're in the West Coast. Yeah, January, yeah. January, and then March, April, and then May usually is when nationals are. So you got a few solid months there, but as everyone may be familiar with,
coronavirus pandemic in the U.S. really started to pick up right around end of February, middle of March is when people started staying home and events really started being canceled. So that kind of smacked us right in the middle of our season. And so I think unfortunately, you know, we're faced with this dilemma going forward is this right now would be the time when we want to get our mountain bike and cyclocross seasons prepped.
And I think we've all had to make some pretty tough decisions. And that has resulted so far in the Eastern collegiate cycling, mountain bike, and cyclocross seasons being canceled. The Atlantic collegiate cycling seasons being canceled. The Southeast seasons have been canceled. The Midwest has canceled.
and the West Coast. So California has canceled all in the last month or two. That's a six out of 11 conferences. Is that right? Five, six, yeah, five of 11. It's about half, right? Yeah, but two conferences are apparently without a conference director right now. Right. The Southwest is not holding their mountain biker cross either. That's right. That's a good point. Yes, that's six of 11. You're correct. Six of 11.
While USA Cycling is still considering hosting nationals. But actually, let's talk first about what led us to canceling our seasons now and why we did. So I guess I'll kick this off. My assistant conference director, Alan Atwood, who is just the saint of New England cycling and cycling in the Northeast in general,
been a really good voice and tone of institutional knowledge. Me and him sat down, we were like, all right, let's look at the guidelines, because we're in the Northeast right now, and if you look at the map of cases, we're the only place that can really even consider hosting races right now.
And, you know, we were going to, you know, we've got the registration stuff. We figured that out. We've got it ready for, you know, we had it ready for mountain season, but we figured we could have it ready for, like, you know, Road 2021 in the spring or Mountain 2021 next fall, if need be. If need be, we've got new, you know, structures for the races, you know, a lot of individual events kind of stuff. Like, you know, have you ever heard of a single slalom?
Ew. I know, not nearly as fun, but it was going to have to be done. So we figured all that out, and then we were like, you know what, we don't know what it's going to be like when the schools actually get back in session, because this is one of the other things that we struggled with, and I know you guys talked about as well.
is, you know, we have a strong duty of care for people who are actually racing. We need to make sure that the races are safe. We need to make sure everybody's fun, having fun, and everything is going to go smoothly. And as little, you know, falling off your bike and, you know, you get hurt, then that's going to be your fault, not like because we didn't set up the race properly. So we had everything set out right, and we're looking at state guidelines, and we're like, but these are college kids.
And we really only have jurisdiction over them while they're racing. And off the race, they're camping usually at the race site, like in the parking lot, or right side of the parking lot, like camping on the mountain. And we cannot control what people do there. We can't stand around and make sure that people are socially distancing or anything like that. And we weren't even sure if schools are going to let...
kids go to events and really why would they? Because you can send a kid to an event and they'll pick up the virus, go back to his class where some 60, 70, 80 year old professor who's in a very high risk category is going to pick it up and also then that exposes us to a lawsuit as well and we don't trust USA Cycling to have our backs with that kind of liability or them or the insurance that they have.
So that was a big question also Although it is interesting because on one of the webinars to promoters USA Cycling did make the claim that their event insurance for all of the races that they permit would cover a claim if someone did contact coronavirus
And if they could prove that it was done at a race, like the same insurance that would pay if someone had a catastrophic crash or an injury or something like that, they made the claim that it would cover, although who knows, right? Well, the feedback I got from that from people in the know was, I can't believe he said that with a straight face. Yeah. Well, and let's, I mean, we don't really need to dive into...
what USA Cycling's insurance actually contributes to the overall claim. I mean, when we're talking about, you know, potential loss of life here for, you know, really bad scenarios or, you know, somebody being intubated, I mean, the cost, you know, for insurance and what actually gets contributed, you know, those are two very different things.
And now when we're talking about liability, that's also, you know, a separate issue for event promoters, which is really, you know, for us was a concern because one of the highlights during I think that same webinar was if you're not following any of the state guidelines or if there's, you know, some sort of gap in your
Your ability to put on this event, you know, the insurance might not cover you. So, I mean, there's a really fine line between, you know, being covered and not being covered. It's it seems and, you know, for us, liability was a huge, huge part of our conversation as well with all the other things that, you know, that you've already mentioned. Yeah. Laura, did you find that same thing? Yeah, I was going to say.
Even beyond that, even beyond the liability that we obviously don't have the capacity to take on as conference leadership is the fact that collegiate cycling is a social community. Like everyone's carpooling and camping or crashing into hotels room together. And people are making the same argument when trying to plan public school gatherings in the fall.
We can host classes twice a week, but there's no lunch, there's no lockers, there's no talking, basically talking to your friends. So literally, what's the point? And we're not in this to get our kids USA Cycling points. If somebody wants to do that and they're in college, they're going to do it. And our goal is to foster this community.
of fun related to bikes. And I mean, this is in our mission statement, which is now on the USA Cycling website. I haven't seen it, but I hear it's there. IT issues again. Sure. And I think that that brings up a good point. Like right now we're kind of in this weird space, like all these conferences, you know, sorry, not all, a majority of the conferences have made calls already about canceling seasons. And I think
people are a little bit unsure and a little confused because right now if you look out in the bike reg page you'll see that people are actually hosting races now and like Nick you went to actually one of the or the first I believe the first race back right yeah after the can you tell us a little bit about about what your experience there was you were you were guinea picking yourself right yeah I mean essentially I mean that was
That was one of the biggest reasons that I decided to attend this event. Georgia, right now, is probably one of the leading states when it comes to opening things back up. Rightfully or wrongfully, their state leadership has made certain decisions when it comes to how people can gather.
By the regulations that were put out by the government, this event, you know, totally hit the mark. I mean, they were, you know, they had 50 people to a field, which was in the nature of the governor's executive order. So, you know, you have 50 person fields and it was capped. I mean, you didn't have 51, you didn't have 52, people were turned away. And, you know, as an event promoter,
where you have, you know, hundreds of people asking you, you know, can I get in? And you're telling them no. I mean, all else being said, they followed that guideline to a tee. So, you know, then we get to race day and, you know, I pull up just like you would at a collegiate race and you get into the, you look at the, this, it was a parking lot crit.
but a professional parking lot crit. You would not know that there was a pandemic going on. There was not a single mask worn or socially distant bike rider. It just didn't happen. And everybody looked at it to me like a giant
Get Together. I mean, it looked like a welcoming back to sport almost. And, you know, my team did as best as we could, you know, trying to, you know, keep our tent away from others, trying to, you know, limit our interactions to just race interactions. I mean, there's only so much you can do when there are 50 other people in your field.
And, you know, to my knowledge, there's not a single documented case from a bicycle race that's been put on since this event. So, you know, there were four events this weekend or that weekend, and it was, you know, pretty much everybody was the exact same through and through. So, you know, you would think by this point we would have heard
of cases cropping up if it was going to happen. So I'm very thankful that myself and none of my teammates and none of the other competitors got sick, at least to our knowledge, and that we haven't then passed it on asymptomatically to somebody else. So we're very fortunate there because I think that what I saw was to me a giant risk and was really one of the
reasons that I knew I had to cancel our season. Because if you look at how a group of people aging 16 to 65 plus, right? I mean, that's your field here. I mean, there were a ton of people across all genders and age groups. And then we're going to say, oh, no.
Collegiate kids are going to behave way better than these people because following direction is exactly what every collegiate cyclist does. That to me was just, it was the first, well it wasn't even the first bell or red flag that went off. This was just honestly, this was kind of the nail in the coffin because everything else that our conference leadership had seen up to this point was, you know,
was very questionable about whether or not we were going to be able to even have events. And, you know, we did a lot of surveys and, you know, we had information going into this, but this was kind of like, for me, this is what I needed to see. And Lauren, you've had, you're in Colorado. Have there been any events or returns to events out there? I know that...
There have, actually. We have a lot of unsanctioned racing that happens in Colorado. The community is very saturated. We've had a lot of unsanctioned mountain bike races that are kind of happening as staggered start, which theoretically works, but, you know, even people I know have said, hey, we're doing this, my team's doing this staggered start mountain bike race.
But we all put our estimated finish time at the same so we all get next to each other and we can race as a team. And that's an adult team. So, you know, that's out the window right there. They're hosting the state TT championship this coming weekend, which I think is fine. But I also honestly, and I'm not a TT racer, but what's the point when there has literally been zero racing, in my opinion?
But I mean back to back to our collegiate cancellation like beyond even all the things we've talked about like all of our institutions our conferences make up I don't know exact numbers for the South and East conferences but I don't know we're talking like 30 to 70 schools and those are different teams with different institutional regulations across
X number of states. So where do we draw the line? Like 20% of our teams are not allowed to travel? Like two of our five states aren't allowed to travel? Yeah, we had the same question for ACCC, which was, you know, if only like 20% of schools are allowed to show up, you know, is that going to be fun at all? Is that sporting? Is that fair? And also then the other question was, you know, if we only have 20 to say 50,
Optimistically, 50% of the typical race crowd showing up, you know, every race is going to lose money. And that's not a position that we can put schools or ourselves in. Because usually when a race makes money, the profits go to the school. If a race loses money, well, we can talk. But usually races don't lose money.
Yeah, so that was one of the other things that brought us to our decision was, you know, we can't, you know, be sure that enough people are going to show up to make this race financially viable. Right, and I should also mention as far as, I mean, any race directing goes, but also collegiate race directing, these things take months to prepare, and so we can't, it didn't make sense for us, and I'm sure you guys had a similar mindset, like we can't be planning.
to cancel a month before. Like that is such a waste of time and resources. And we can't wait around for all of our institutions to publish their fall guidelines. Those things are changing like weekly, every few days for some, honestly. Yeah, and I think they're vague intentionally as, you know, as potential cover for school liability as well. Well, and that was one of our things. So, you know, we did a survey back in May.
to try and get in, you know, obviously, I mean, things have changed in this country so much from, you know, May to now. I mean, the caseload is, you know, at a completely different point. I mean, in states that weren't having issues, you know, South Carolina, where I live now, you know, we went from, I want to say we were in the 300s per day to now we just had 2,000 cases, you know, per day.
To what Laura Ann was talking about, you know, we're looking at, you know, multiple different states being in multiple different spots with their virus response. I mean, North Carolina handled the pandemic completely differently than South Carolina. And, you know, we're talking about completely different regulations. And so do students from, you know, one state, do they even get to travel?
into another state. And if they do, do they have to quarantine? I mean, are we talking about a quarantining scenario here? And at that point where we had schools saying, we don't know if we can travel or we don't even know if we're going to be back. You know, we looked at, you know, the exact same thing. It takes us at minimum.
We came up with a timeline for when we needed to start actually getting forest permits or venue permits. And it was now. I mean, it was last week. And that was, you know, one of our biggest questions was, you know, why are you canceling it now? You still have so much time between now and August or September. And it's like, event promoting doesn't start.
two weekends before. That's the criticism from somebody who's never put on a race. Right. Another factor is we're all in this uncertainty, but so are all of our venues and all of the sponsors of these races. In collegiate cycling and in most races, there are a lot of venues that we have long-standing relationships with, and we want to keep a good relationship with them in the long term.
Planning a race that we cancel a month before because we're holding out for whatever reason is not ideal. So I think a big question in my mind was also just having an event venue change their mind two weeks before.
things look a little bit different and things are looking good heading in to August and say things get worse in September and then two weeks before your race your venue decides to cancel and pull your permit back or say no sorry we're concerned about optics or liability or something like that like what do you do you know like do you like good luck trying to find a last minute mountain bike race venue right like like two weeks before there's nothing you can do and you end up canceling anyway and I think that
like everyone else has said given how uncertain the state-to-state regulations are the university regulations are it just you would be attempting to juggle so many things and getting so many things to line up and that is even before you consider the potential risk to the participants and the event hosts and the officials and team coaches and even the roommates or
Close family and friends of all those people involved with just putting a race on. Well, and speaking of that, there are reasons, I think, that promoters of events would actually, like Tour of North Georgia, where you would actually not want it to get out if you actually had positive cases coming out of your event because of the liability and the optics and all of that. There might be a response bias there.
Well, I think that any race promoter has a duty to report a positive case. I mean, I cannot imagine, you know, the only way I foresee a race, and I've dealt with plenty of sketchy race promoters in my life. We have a few up here. Yeah, but I don't think that there's any way that a race promoter would knowingly.
you know put put their riders in in harm's way to you know to put on an event I mean I understand I mean there's a huge financial you know all of these people it and this is just my opinion is that race promoters this is for the good ones this is their job right like this is what they do for the year to make money and that's it I mean they don't have
you know, things on the back burner to, you know, generate dollars. So I understand that there is a huge financial impetus to try and get racing started back up. That's what I was about to say. Yeah. We just have to be, I mean, what happens if it is your event, right? I mean, you're walking a very fine line as a race promoter to say, okay, well,
Yes, this is my job and I've got all these things I got to do, but that's not in collegiate cycling. That's not really what we're worried about. I mean, you know, these, these kids are, you know, sometimes this is their largest fundraiser, but if nobody's racing and nobody's traveling, you don't need to be raising funds right now. Like it's not important for, for collegiate kids right now to be racing. And that's, that I think is probably the biggest thing is that.
Our role is to guide all student-athletes that are on bikes towards a sustainable future, and that includes not racing right now. Yeah, and that includes maintaining their lung function because they don't get the coronavirus.
Exactly. But I mean, I was just thinking actually, Nick, that's why I brought that up is because I was just thinking that there's probably a short-term financial incentive for like the tour, the promoter for a tour of North Georgia. He had other events permitted through USA Cycling. And, you know, like if, you know, cases came out of that event, his permits would be probably hopefully be canceled. And, you know, there goes his...
There goes his money for the year. So, you know, there's like the short term and the long term, like what's riskier kind of thing for that promoter in particular. That's the only, that's my only thought on that. Right. Well, I think, and this comes back to, you know, the, what we commented on earlier too, was that, you know, how do you know that it happened at an event, right? Like, unless if you are socially isolating yourself everywhere else in your life,
And then you say, oh, I'm going to go race bikes this weekend. And, oh, I caught it because I was at that bike race. I mean, there are so many things that people do nowadays. And I mean, that you don't even think about friends, you know, I, for instance, went out to lunch with a coworker and their husband is, you know, was showing a fever the day before.
Right. And now I'm having to quarantine because, you know, we don't even know that we don't know that he's positive, you know, that he's getting tested. But there's, you know, it's just little interactions like that. I mean, you could be having a conversation with somebody and then their significant other had a conversation with somebody. And next thing you know, you've got coronavirus. I mean, that's it's six degrees of COVID.
No, that's totally fair. I mean, at least in the Northeast, the tenor up here is a lot different where people are, you know, for the most part, very, very conscious of isolating and staying away from each other. And like, you know, just going around, people, you know, pull their masks up before they pass somebody and they pass far away. And like, everybody's being really cool about it up here. You know, it's obviously different where you are. But I do totally agree with you that it's very different with collegiate cycling in that respect.
I think this is also a good time to mention that we as collegiate cycling leadership are actually volunteers and we have no financial incentive to cancel or not cancel. We're really here for the long-term holistic community of collegiate cyclists. Yeah, I think that's a good point. Like you're, you know, it's the middle of July now and you're even starting to see
The big money sports in the intercollegiate athletics world starting to cancel or delay or change. And so they're the ones that are staring down these million dollar whatever contracts. Like we really have, as Lauren said, we really have the health and safety and sustainability of the programs in mind.
Yeah, it doesn't cost us anything to keep the conference around for another year while nothing's happening. Right. And like Nick said, if schools aren't hosting races, they don't actually really need very much money, so they're not going to disappear because of this either. Right. Actually, it might be interesting now to talk about the push from varsity. Just to make it clear, up here in the ECCC, we have no varsity schools. And there are certain criteria of financial... You okay?
Kyle's like, oh no, varsity. I'm stroking out. I have a visceral reaction. So there's a list of criteria. I think there's four criteria for being a varsity squad. And we don't have to get too far into it. But basically, the varsity coaches, they do have more of a financial interest.
in racing actually happening. So let's talk about that for a little bit. Well, as the resident representative of the conference that has over half of the varsity programs in the country, I guess I can speak to that. So, yeah, I mean, the varsity schools provide a consistent
count of riders to every weekend. I mean, that is, you know, one of the, and they produce quality athletes. I mean, there have been national champions, world team riders, and, you know, you name the accolade, there has been a rider that's come out of our conference that has contributed to that. But at the same time,
These varsity schools are, you know, most of them are private colleges. They're smaller programs. I want to say that probably the average student body is between two and four thousand students. And most of those students are on some kind of athletic scholarship. So that is one of the reasons why they put such an intrinsic value on.
on sport and, you know, cycling, you know, most specifically in this scenario, they, I mean, we've got probably a hundred or more varsity student athletes in our conference and they're, you know, now varsity is kind of new for, you know, those that are.
Kind of listening in from maybe an older time, they used to be the, you know, we used to split schools up by size of their programs. It used to be D1 and D2. And, you know, the D2 schools were, you know, generally made up these varsity programs. And then as time has come along, we've said that the varsity programs are students that get more support. They should really be racing, you know.
at a national level they should be racing against each other and then club sports those kids that you know really are just going to school for school and love racing bikes you know that's that's a different group of people then I mean when you talk about varsity athletics some of those kids are more supported than the D1 teams that are racing you know professionally you know for on the roadside and I mean
Varsity definitely provides a lot of support and value to kids if they want to experience college on a bike. And so let's bring that back to the cancellation of your season because I've heard that you've had some pretty upset varsity coaches and others, other staff from schools that have their...
Kyle, don't spoil it, that have a big cycling program as their marquee sport. Well, yeah, I mean, like I said, varsity schools have a huge investment in students racing in college. And if there's not racing, and that's one of the biggest values that you bring to your student,
You know, it's kind of you're going to they're going to get questions from parents about, well, why is my kid coming to school or is my kid going to come to your school if if there's no racing? I mean, you know, our social media accounts have, you know, between two and three thousand followers and a lot of them, surprisingly for me, are parents.
And, you know, the parents saw our social media post and then, you know, that gets retweeted or reshared by students and it just, it lit the world on fire. And, you know, the reaction, you know, just like I'm sure that there are parents worried about their kids' little league baseball or football this year and getting upset with coaches or with, you know, regional program managers getting.
questioning why their sport is being canceled. I mean, you think about baseball. They're talking now about getting professional baseball back up and started. Why can't Little League Baseball be going? So I understand where program managers that are having to worry about student bodies, whether or not...
They're going to be coming to race this fall or at all for that matter. But I just think that we as conference leadership, you know, and we talked about this earlier, is that we have a duty to student health and that's it. You know, that's that's where the line is in the sand. And when we as a board were talking about we're talking about canceling the season. Sure. We talked about.
having the financial impact to students and their organizations. But that was a small part of the conversation in all reality. I mean, I don't think that we could put a dollar amount to somebody coming to one of our events and catching the virus and then bringing it back to our school or bringing it back to their school. I mean, that's...
That to me is the scariest thing about this, is that we could, you know, us being some sort of epicenter for transfer, you know, let's say a school from Georgia met in South Carolina, or met for an event in South Carolina, and then a team from Tennessee came down, and, you know, there are zero cases or a low volume of cases, you know, at that university, and then next thing you know
One kid goes back and it gets into a dorm room and then across campus. You just spiral all of that and it just doesn't look good at all. I think the other thing that you bring up there too, you potentially have teams coming from far distances and anyone who's ever driven across the country for a long time knows that you stop and you get food and you're like...
You're never actually sure, yeah, you can be safe as you're driving and things like that, but you're just, the farther you travel, the more and more people you're potentially exposed to that you don't, whose history you don't know, right? Yeah. And especially for cohesion cycling, like, if you look at, like, these proposals from the Major League Baseball and hockey and all this stuff, they're talking about testing players, like,
every other day or two to three times a week, right? Like how many college cyclists out there are going to get tested after every race weekend and like, or every other, you know, two or three times a week, every other day, something like that while they're in school if they're racing their bikes. Like, I just, I don't think that students are going to have the ability to do that even if they wanted to. Well, and I think, you know, let's...
Talk about that a little bit more practically, too. I mean, right now, I don't know what it is like for where you guys are at, but we're looking at 7 to 14 days to get a test result back in South Carolina. I mean, that's, you know, enough time to meet a ton of people on your campus, and it pretty much removes the ability for us to do any sort of contract tracing at our events if somebody did have it.
and so you know one of the things that I've heard is you know that the you know NCAA is talking about testing you know thermometer testing and all that kind of stuff but it just doesn't remove you know we're talking about mitigating of risk and that to me is just a small small part of it you know we you know and I don't know if now is the time to transition into what do we think racing looks like you know going forward but I mean
You know, we have not yet canceled our cross season. We're still holding out to see what the rest of the country looks like. We do, you know, obviously our mountain season is done, but there is, you know, cross or a gravel-like event. We haven't really figured out which could make sense if the country and, you know, universities are showing low transfers in this fall.
Although in the interest of cyclocross season or a late fall early winter event for collegiate is a lot of our in the ACCC I'm not sure what the southeast is looking like Nick but we're ending classes by Thanksgiving which is the middle of the cyclocross season for us usually so you're
Can you hold events after? What's the idea? Well, so we talked about, I mean, we've all said that there are so many things that are changing. I mean, we've talked about hosting a couple of events. I mean, when I first, you know...
got into my position. The cyclocross season for the Southeast was one race or maybe two. And I think that that's true with several of the conferences across the country. They don't even have actual cross seasons. They just tell people go race open. But what we normally do is we'll have six races in our cross season and we pair them up with a professional event.
The UCI race in Hendersonville is a dual conference event with you guys and we'll pair up with other North Carolina or Georgia or Tennessee cross races and then do it there. I think that what we're looking at is either doing a couple of events before the Thanksgiving break and then a couple of events in January.
Assuming that with students going out at Thanksgiving is probably going to mean that they're coming back the week after New Year's, maybe picking things back up after that. It all just, at this point, is just an idea in my head. There's not any sort of pen on paper saying these are the things that we're going to do because I wouldn't have thought that I was going to have to.
experienced 2,000 cases a day in South Carolina, but here we are. You know what actually reminds me of trying to look at future racing for collegiate is the weather prediction forecasts for temperature and stuff or global warming predictions of temperature rise, like how as the farther it goes out, the error bars get wider and wider. That's what it reminds me of.
I think the other thing is that we even had even if we wanted to like in the mid-Atlantic look to partnering up with existing cyclocross races a bunch of them have already canceled like we have like the big UCI races in Baltimore and DC announced like last week they're canceled and it's the middle of July and so now Virginia cyclocross is completely canceled at least sanctioned
And so even if and so when we canceled our mountain bike and cyclocross together, we kind of saw this coming. We're like, you know, especially because we don't put on our own cyclocross races. Yeah, you're at the you're at the mercy, so to speak, of that third party promoter. Yeah, I mean, I'm the the target for me is going to be that.
is really seeing what promoters are doing because, you know, our region is, you know, still actively racing. So it's going to fall a lot more in line with what students and universities are doing. It'll give us the visibility of what, you know, what the landscape is then. I mean, to do it right now, I would like to come up with a plan that says,
you know in January as opposed to saying oh well we're not doing cross at all kind of thing and that's just I mean gosh that's five months away guys I mean it's it's you know it's scary to think that that you know this is the world that we're going to be living in for you know what another year maybe gosh I I hear you there and I think that part of the reason that I feel like
making a call relatively early isn't that strange is because so many months have already passed in what feels like no time as I sit at home and like slowly get swallowed up by my couch that like yeah like it's it's this weird time warp where it is a long way away but it's kind of not a long way away it's not very uh
Well, you know, you've heard that theory about why life seems to go faster as you get older is because you have less impactful events happening as you go through life. And, you know, we all have a mutual friend who will occasionally remind us like, hey, PSA, it's Wednesday. Yeah, exactly. Oh, actually, it's Sunday. My God. What happened to the time?
you know it gets me to kind of thinking like what is gonna happen with road 2021 anyone question mark yeah can I caveat back to the fall mountain bike cross very quickly sure yeah go ahead I just wanted to say that some of the questions that we've gotten in the Atlantic and definitely something we took into consideration before we made our cancellation which we actually did in the beginning of June
We were one of the first conferences to cancel was what happens if collegiate nationals happens? Collegiate mountain bike nationals happens. What happens if collegiate cyclocross nationals, which is looped with amateur and professional cyclocross nationals, with USA Cycling happens? Like, what do we do? So we default to open racing is really the only thing that we can do in fairness.
Which actually is not even very fair either because that completely depends on state regulations, state racing And if red states, if riders from red states go to nationals, I think that is also unfair I just don't, I'm hoping that in the world where over half of the conferences have cancelled
their seasons that USA Cycling did cancel all of the other national championships for the rest of this year. They canceled them up through what was scheduled for early mid-September. I think there's like four or five left. I think the only thing that's left is collegiate. I know there's four or five left. I'll look it up right now. I double-checked right after that because that's what everybody's been looking at.
Oh, what about collegiate? But I looked at the schedule and there were actually a couple more. Well, I just, you know, I hope that as leaders of collegiate cycling that we would have a seat at the table and be a very loud part of the conversation that says there should not be any collegiate cycling national championship. Well, we're loud.
I mean, we're allowed, but I mean, at the end of the day, we are not going to be, you know, we don't hold the authority to issue the press release that says collegiate nationals is canceled, but we don't get to do that. But we also know that varsity coaches are, you know, holding
and USA Cycling's feet to the fire on holding collegiate nationals because they want their national titles. They want to justify why they have their jobs. Oh, yeah. I mean, as I said before, going to nationals is a big incentive for a lot of these programs. You guys heard the rumor that some of the varsity...
Programs were talking about holding like a bandit nationals. Like if USA Cycling doesn't hold it, like screw you. We're going to have our own. In my opinion, that's completely fine. They're welcome to do that. But that's not a real nationals. Because it's not sponsored by the national governing body, right? That and that excludes over half of the participants. Yeah. Even if they don't race varsity racers. Yeah. I mean, I think it's different.
In a way, because I've thought of this too, you know, because one of the things that some of my athletes say to me, like, oh, you know, what about this race? There's going to be nobody there. And I'm like, well, if anybody else wanted to win it, they would show up. And in this case, it's not that like they're not showing up. It's that they can't show up. Well, I think this goes back to the point that you're a coach, right? I mean, if you're so I know that there's a little bit of a
Probably a rock and a hard place scenario going on, but I think that coaches have to have student athletes' health and well-being as their first priority, and if that's not how you're operating, then there's a real problem, at least in my mind. And I don't know how you can, in good conscience, send riders
to a national event with the risks that we know are very real. I mean, this is an endurance sport. I mean, you can't exactly race your bike without proper lung function. And what we've seen so far is that this can permanently damage your lungs. That's just way too big of a risk. Yeah. And I mean, there's a lot of people saying, oh, you know, it's...
The death rate, blah, blah, blah, but it's like the young people catching it, and the young people are still susceptible to long-term horrific damage. We just don't know the number, or I haven't seen any numbers yet. I'm sure somebody's published something somewhere. But anyway, but actually as a coach... Oh, sorry, go ahead. Sorry, the update on Nationals is only through Masters Road, which is August 2nd. So Collegiate Track is the next...
Unchanged at this time. Oh my goodness. September 10th through 13th. Right, so it's Collegiate Track, then it's Collegiate Mountain Bike. BMX, which is... Oh, BMX, right. Then there's like two or three more, right? Collegiate Mountain Bike, Marathon Mountain Bike, and then Cross, which is early December right now. Marathon Mountain Bike, that was it. Yeah, anyway. Okay, thank you. So, I think back to Kyle's original question is,
Spring 2021 I mean I'm not in the medical field at all but I just the way things are going I don't know if I see it I mean so I guess you know I talked a little bit about gravel slash cross you know in January and you know that'll be you know
We are still going to probably have our bidding process, which is a big part of our collegiate setup, is making sure that we have schools that want to host events put in their bids, and we'll at least generate a calendar. I mean, I know that's probably hard to say six months away from doing it, but...
It's not that big a deal to do it. It doesn't take any financial investment, and it still keeps the connection between the conference and the schools. We're going to ask for bids, too, and we're going to prep for a season that may or may not happen, because if it's going to happen, we've got to be ready. But if it's not going to happen, it's better to have prepped and canceled. Are you guys doing the same in the ACCC?
have gone back and forth as to whether or not, like when we start soliciting road bids, like the ACCC a long time ago, this is maybe, you can cut this, but used to solicit road, ACCC a long time ago used to solicit road bids in the spring for the following spring, like a year later. Oh yeah. And we've tried to change that up to be more in line with what other conferences do and solicit in the fall for the spring. So yeah, we
I don't think we've actually said anything as to whether we'll solicit bids. I mean, I think my initial thought is we will make a call on if we're going to solicit bids in August or September once we even see how many kids we're talking to, honestly. We don't even know where kids are right now. My big question is
is if school it seems like a lot of schools have set up some sort of combination approach like some kids are in on campus some are remote and they're going to switch back and forth and this means that for the whole year you may not have all of your students on campus together which means for us that you may not have
all of your available racers on campus together. And who knows if they will continue some, like, before we canceled the rest of the road season, for example, various schools had instituted policies that certain, you know, for their clubs or inter, uh, intercollegiate.
clubs, be they sports or not sports, were not allowed to travel beyond a certain distance outside of where campus was or things like that. And so if those rules continue, we will have to see. We'll have to take a really good look at what schools are actually doing. Oh, we're going to have to. Oh, sorry. Go ahead. I was just going to say, I am honestly a little bit concerned about communication with our clubs as well, because pandemic.
started right before our turnover of team leadership happened. Our end of season meeting where we get from the old team leader who's going to be the new team leader, etc. So I'm interested to see how the turnover happened and how clubs and how we honestly can support a lot of our clubs and our teams.
through that transition when there's not the in-person interaction that we usually have. Well, I mean, I think that, I mean, that's one of my biggest concerns right now is how do we keep people engaged and interested? And then also, you know, who are we keeping engaged and interested? Exactly. I know firsthand that, you know, the person that was taking over
at Clemson, for instance, is now not coming back to school. So I have a huge concern with, is that program now going to dissolve? I mean, this is a big issue that we all fight with collegiate cycling is turnover in leadership. And I mean, the reason that half of these programs exist is because some person really likes
you know, put it falling on the sword to make sure that, you know, I mean, I'll tell you, I mean, when I was club president for Clemson, that was probably, you know, at least 15 hours a week for me. That is, dude, you need, you need to delegate more. Like, no, um, well, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm joking mostly, but like, um,
But I know MIT pretty well, their club's infrastructure, and they have officer elections, they have very well-organized duties, they have a great website, they have everything together that you would want together. And the thing that really holds them together outside of having a good structure, and obviously a bunch of really smart kids who can make that structure.
is that the MIT listserv for group rides is kind of like the de facto collegiate ride list. And a lot of where MIT gets new recruits is like somebody's got a friend who rides a bike, they come on some of the rides, they have a good time. Hey, I want to be as fast as that person in the MIT kit. Well, she's a national champion. You should probably go talk to her about racing.
you know that's the kind of thing that happens and it really gets people into into racing and MIT is just a club a club school where they have produced a ton of incredibly fast people so and they have a huge membership like them and like Dartmouth and etc etc I mean we've got clubs like that too I mean Georgia Tech
comes to mind. I mean, they've got, you want to talk about a bunch of type A engineers, you got it. And, you know, I think they fight over leadership positions there. I mean, they've got, you know, a road captain, a mountain captain, they've got a president, vice president. I mean, they're... That sounds about right. Yeah, I mean, so like, you know, size of the program really helps.
I would love to be able to pop up a ton more Georgia Tech cycling teams across my conference, but that's just, unfortunately, that's just not how it works. You've got clubs that are five to ten riders that just like to ride bikes and they represent their school and that's about it, but they're there. And they're not always thinking about bringing in new people either. No.
And I mean, that's, that's, that's the thing is like trying to, you know, a part of my job is trying to coach these kids in, you know, in leadership and, hey, you know, you're about to graduate, you know, let's start talking about, you know, who have you identified to take over? I mean, if you've been doing this yourself, you know, who's been
close to you who's been working with you on stuff. And I mean, that's generally how it happens is you just got somebody that's really passionate about collegiate bike racing and they become a club president and eventually a conference director, right? Yeah. That's how we're all here, basically. Except me. But I think this goes to say that all these things kind of get to this point that
Collegiate Cycling is in a very interesting and unknown place just like everything else in this world. And we are out here trying to make the best decision with riders in mind. And even though it sucks to miss out on racing, and we know that...
For example, collegiate racing. You can't race in collegiate for forever, even though some conference directors some places do. Some conference directors. We know that it sucks if you're going to miss out on your senior season or something like that, but we're in a really tough spot where is it fair to say that we're just...
We're just going to go through with it all. And I don't think anyone who says that we're looking at these things with a certain bias that is anything but worrying about rider safety and the sustainability of collegiate cycling. I did not phrase that correctly, Jesus. I don't think anyone who is...
out there saying that we are trying to do this in either a selfish way or not considering what's happening or the negative impacts of riders just hasn't really had to make decisions like this before. We don't want to get kids sick like we talked about and we also know that it sucks to miss out on racing. Everyone in all of their activities is making these same decisions. We're just in a unique place without the financial incentives, without...
Just the unique structure of collegiate cycling where we can make these pretty early on and honestly support our riders in cycling to keep sane during their senior year while they're online at home with their parents. That to me is really what we need to be focusing on right now even if we do collect road bids for the spring, etc.
For sure. And I think you bring up another good point. The nice thing about cycling is that you can do it elsewhere. You cannot be a single member of a college football team and be stuck at home and still play football unless you're playing Madden. But you can still ride your bike and you can still find ways to interact with your teammates and even your fellow conference competitors in ways that
You just can't really do other sports. Yeah, actually I thought you were going to say, you know, this is one of the good things about there's no money in cycling. Also that. Also that. Well, and I was waiting for you to make a Madden to Zwift comparison, but you didn't do that either. Well, I think Zwift is actually one of those things where we're all going, oh God, do we have to? But at the same time, like, yeah, we might have to.
because I know for me if I were going to try to get clubs to increase their membership the first thing I would do is say make a list serve for group rides and have regular group rides have everybody submit their rides meet up to these places and like just invite people to ride with you and that's going to be a big stepping stone and we can't do that right now.
which would be my normal go-to to stem the tide of shrinking clubs in these times. So who's got thoughts on Zwift Nationals? Oh god. Trigger me. I mean I think at the end of the day it's going to come down to people accepting that if something were to happen on Zwift it is
It is not meant to be the same as an actual in-person race, but instead just a way to keep people engaged and give them something to do. Because for a lot of people, you know, riding their bike and racing and training is their outlet for stress from school and life and what have you.
I'm not under any idea I don't hold any assumption that Zwift racing is like real racing but I think that it's one bad idea out of a whole host of bad ideas
You're really trying to get me to not jump on you for saying I want Zwift racing. I'm not saying that we should have worn Stars and Stripes jerseys for Zwift racing. I'm just saying that like...
Actually, whoever wins Zwift Nationals will actually get a national championship avatar Yeah, yeah, you get a little And that's great, honestly, that's great, just stay in your lane I don't care if people want a Zwift You just gotta watch out for the person who then rocks up the next year with Stars and Stripes armbands on a kit Oh, no I had a teammate like this, I had a teammate like this, she's a Zwift
Quote Professional, she was a Cat 3 in Real Road, she upgraded to Cat 2, and she got time cut the first day of the Colorado Classic, and we were like, wow, um, yep, bye. And she quit the team because she was upset she wasn't good, and she thought she was a pro. Well, did you see that tweet from Jonathan Vaughters, I think one or two days ago? Yeah, it was like, I've been looking at power files, and it turns out that Zwift racing is...
Nothing like actual road racing. And everybody is going, how could you not tell that already without even looking at the power files? Yeah. I'm waiting for, you know, Kyle, you got me. Pixelated stars and stripes. That's it. That's what I'm waiting for. The 8-bit. But anyway, I mean, I think that it is...
You know, just suffice to say that no one knows what's going to happen, unfortunately. And everyone is trying to do the best with the information that we have available to ourselves, just like people are making decisions about the activities they do at home. And collegiate cycling is a, you know, we're obviously a much more niche sport, so we don't have contracts like that Big Ten schools have signed contracts, you know, for, for, and, you know, eight,
eight, ten years in advance, stuff like that, to play these football games. And so they're super, super, super reluctant to cancel. Whereas for us, you know, we can be a little bit more aggressive. Finally, not having nationals figured out three years in advance actually pays off. Yes. Exactly. The last thing about Zwift racing that I will say, just for listeners who are not very familiar with collegiate cycling.
is that collegiate cyclists are very poor and do not have nice bikes or smart trainers or money for Zwift memberships. Well, that's one of the beautiful things about collegiate cycling is that you run what you brung and you don't race what you can't replace and you can't replace much as a college student. So, yeah, you're going to be on your CAD 8 with box section wheels.
and Gator Skins and you're going to have a great time and every one of your friends is going to be screaming their heads off as you sprint for 1st, 10th, 15th, 30th like they're going to be cheering you on. I think the other thing too is like in that same spirit like for a majority of collegiate cyclists they know that they are not going to be professionals so like if you're a D1 basketball player or something like that
Potentially not playing a senior season means you may miss out on some sort of giant professional contract, but that is certainly not the case for 99, maybe 99.99% of our riders. Yeah, and very few of them actually get, quote unquote, discovered through collegiate cycling because if you're racing collegiate and you're really fast, you're probably also racing regular events also. And there are a lot of people who only race collegiate. There's a ton of them.
Suffice to say, I don't think it would be a good idea to schedule any type of big intercollegiate sporting event for this fall, bike racing or otherwise. Yeah, especially anything that encourages national travel, flying, like driving long distances, like people coming from other places, because this is one of the things that we're keeping an eye out on is like, what's the dynamic going to be this fall?
for campuses and sports. Are they going to have to clamp down harder? Are they going to have to just send people home and just say spring semester is all online? What are they going to be doing? And that's going to help inform the spring road season. Yeah. But that's what we're all waiting for, right? I mean, now we all get to play the fun game of watch and wait for August.
because most of our schools are announcing their actual school attendance policies, I want to say, next week. And I'm interested. Yeah. Although I think a little bit, the more north you go, the more schools have released. I know we've had some schools that have come out with.
You know, at least rough outlines for what they're going to be doing. Oh, yeah. I mean, there are outlines, but I mean, plenty of our schools have said, oh, well, we're going to come back. But then at the same time, they're like, ah, now hold on just a minute. We said we were going to come back, but now we're talking about 2,000 cases a day. Let's go on ahead and hold off on that.
for another couple weeks. Even in the event that schools are like, hey, it's all good, let's have fun, we still have to look at what's happening in the region and still make the decision whether or not holding these races is a good idea or not. So it's not just like, if we can find a way, we'll do it. That's very much not the case. Which is actually normally how collegiate cycling works.
Completely. It's like, if we can find a way to, if you're starting in a pair of jorts and borrowed shoes, you're going to start this bike race. And that is a personal experience. Do you have a helmet? Do you have a bike? Excellent. Is there always one functioning brake on said bike? You're good to go. Do you have the required drop bars on this or whatever bars? Like, no? Okay, well, go grab your friend's bike.
Now you're good. Exactly. Yeah, that's, yeah, I didn't race nearly as much collegiate as the rest of you guys did, but I had the absolute best time. And, you know, after that, like Kyle and I were always talking about, that was the best time ever, right? Yeah. Like, that's how I met Kyle, is he destroyed me up a climb.
Only time anyone has ever said that about me climbing. I was about to say, I want to keep that on recording. I'll leave that in. Because we were in this little group of three off the back of the Sea Race. Way off the back. And this other guy from, I think, UMass was like, he's like surging. He was like, let's go, let's go. And I'm like, dude, we have like three more laps of 11 miles. Like, let's hang out. Let's chill. Let's work together.
I remember rolling into that last climb. My thought was like, I'm going to ride away from these guys. This is going to be awesome. I'm going to win our little bunch. And like I stood up and Kyle stood up and Kyle just went, whoosh, whoosh, whoosh, and just like disappeared up the hill. And I was like, I can't even be mad. That was so great. That is the most collegiate description of a bike race I have ever heard. I'm like sprinting for, you know, 36th or whatever on the day.
And you know what? I bet people were cheering for you as they saw you coming to the finish line. Oh, they were. And it doesn't matter what team you're on. They'll just cheer. If they see you going hard, they're like, yeah, more! I miss collegiate bike racing. Guys, I'm going back to collegiate bike racing. I'm so hyped. What's the hardest you guys have ever seen somebody cheer? See, I would say that our
The loudest experience that I always hear is the downhill at our collegiate bike races, which is something else. I mean, you will not live until you've been to some of our downhill sections where it's a rock drop or whatever and you can hear it for miles and it'll just be the...
you know the loud horns and you know kids going oh and it then it's like yeah it's just oh that and what really stinks is I'm at top you know launching these kids and I don't even get to watch what's going on like I want to I want to be there you want to be part of the 150 people who are around that drop hanging out and cheering them on yeah and and you know then I'm like
that's what collegiate cycling is it's all of that environment and then you know there's no way that we could do that with the virus like I'd have to shut all that down and it's like that's not collegiate cycling like the what we came up with as far as like oh yeah we're gonna do time trial mountain bike okay well I mean most mountain bike races are time trial so whatever but getting rid of like
Doing a single slalom? Come on. That's lame. We could do dual slalom, but your downhill crowd, that's our dual slalom crowd. It's loud, it's rowdy, and it's some of the most fun racing I've ever watched. I'm just sitting down at the bottom doing timing. Yeah, I think I'm with you, Koli. It's the lower...
category racing, the D races, the C races, especially for us the men's fields are a lot bigger and that's probably a lot of collegiate conferences, but in the groups that just splinter of five and ten riders and the A riders and the B riders and the beginners are all there because you're all on the same team cheering for every sprint of every little group.
at the beginning of the race or in the middle of the race or at the end. It's every line crossing is cheered for. And I would say one of my favorite things about collegiate cycling is that the A riders and the E riders are teammates. And that doesn't happen in other cycling. Most teams are either elite or not.
The races are usually held at very different times of day, so you don't get a lot of people overlapping. But with collegiate, everybody hangs out all day, all weekend, because there's nothing else to do, because you drove there with your friends, and it's a very different experience from a regular category race. I would say riding in the lead van with teammates, cheering for teammates in other races, is awesome.
like so fun to watch and to be a part of whether you're in the race or directing or in the van yeah it doesn't really matter like what you're doing around around a collegiate bike race it's it's great no matter what Kyle what about you yeah I mean oh man I don't know if it's that or if it's like the fact that collegiate crits are just people align the the entire like
is the circumference of and inside of the correct course. So like you hear and see people like every time you turn your bike or every time you look up, you're like, wait, wasn't that person just like over on the other side of the course? Because people will like cut across the course and stuff and still be yelling at you all the time. And that's just like so fun if you're either doing that or if you're out there on the course.
Yeah, and let's contrast that with something I saw at nationals once. Like, I'm at the finish line watching MIT riders come across, and I hear some guy who's standing around, he's going, why would you sprint for like 15th? It's like, come on, dude. Honestly, I think one of my most proud race results is like 17th in the credit collegiate nationals. That's a good result.
but it's like the most one of the most fun results that I had because of like the sprinting the cheering for every group I think the other thing too is like a lot of times for nationals not that this is necessarily true for everyone but collegiate nationals for a lot of people are the only nationals that they'll ever really get a chance to participate in and so yeah you want to like make the best of it even if it is sprinting for you know 39th or something
Yeah, I would spread for 39th, for sure. I mean, it's your school's pride at that point. I mean, I wasn't even in the top 50 yet. My best collegiate performance, or my first collegiate performance, you know, I was out in Utah. And it was just like, that was the first time I'd ever kind of been across a country on my own, you know, other than like being with teammates. And then it's just like, I'm here, you know,
And I'm going to get the highest placing that my team has ever got at a collegiate nationals. And it's like, whether that's, you know, 59th, it doesn't matter. You know, there were 100 plus dudes on the line. And, you know, finishing top half was like, all right, you know, I'll take that. Is the lowly cat three that I was at the time.
It was, I mean, collegiate nationals, like you said, Kyle, is just, it's completely different and will probably be the most unique experience. I mean, most kids have to choose whether or not they're going to go to graduation or go to collegiate nationals. I mean, that was an easy choice for me. And I think that the real, the best thing, another
Another best thing about collegiate cycling is that everybody's there from the same background. Like, you go to pro-nats, they're, quote, pros with full-time jobs, and they're pros who just ride bikes. And, you know, pros who live at altitude and pros who don't. You know, and there's so many factors. But in collegiate cycling, it's a great equalizer. You're all taking exams during nationals.
No way around it. You're all in full-time school to be able to qualify. I think that's great. Nick, Laura, Ann, I want to thank you guys for coming onto the podcast and talking with us and for anybody listening. We are going to have more collegiate content coming up. So if you're interested in collegiate cycling, please stay tuned for some of that. Yeah, thanks everyone. Thank you. Thanks.
Thank you everybody for listening as always and if you made it this far I assume that you love collegiate cycling like we do or you just love to hear us talk when we appreciate it either way and if you'd like to further show your appreciation you can make a donation at empiricalcycling.com slash donate and feel free to earmark that for something if you want and share the podcast with somebody if you are in the mood to do so and also if you have any questions or comments, coaching inquiries, consultation inquiries you can send an email to empiricalcycling at gmail.com
And with that, thank you as always.